In the previous clips,
when talking about the configuration options of the Gradle and Maven plugins,
I mentioned something about using tags to include or exclude tests
from the overall test discovery and execution.
Well, Tag is an annotation that receives a string to tag a class or a method.
You can apply more than one tag to an element.
Tags can be used on interfaces,
and you know that the classes that implement an annotated
interface also inherit its semantics.
A Tag annotation can also meta‑annotate another annotation,
just like Test and ExtendWith.
About the string value, the Tag annotation receives,
there are a few rules you must consider.
Well, first of all, a tag must not be null or blank.
In fact, the string value is trimmed.
Deleting and trailing whitespace characters are removed. And then,
it's validated so it doesn't contain whitespaces,
ISO control characters, or some reserved characters like a comma,
parentheses, ampersand, pipe, and an exclamation mark.
Remember, in Gradle, tags are configured in the useJUnitPlatform section,
and you can specify more than one tag in a comma‑separated list,
just like in Maven, but, in this case, inside groups or excludedGroups elements,
which are part of the configuration element.
In both Gradle and Maven, you can also use tag expressions,
boolean expressions that use operators for not,
and, and or in that order of preference,
which can be modified with parentheses.
In addition to this, any and none are also supported.
They select all tests with any tags and all tests without any tags,
respectively.
For example, with this expression, we can select all version 1 tests,
but not give tests.
And with this expression,
we can select all gift or conversion tests that are
also tagged as version 1 or 2.
All right, let's see how tags work, first using Gradle and then using Maven.
I have opened the project named Tags that you can find in the
directory for the demos of this module.
It contains configuration files for Gradle and Maven,
so you can import the project in your IDE using either tool.
Let's review the Gradle configuration first.
We are already filtering tests by package,
so we are going to add another filter to include the test tagged with Interface,
for example.
This way,
only the tests with this tag that are contained in the package
com.wiredbraincoffee.reward.test will be executed.
However, notice that to filter by tags you have to use useJUnitPlatform,
not filter.
There's no need to import the changes.
So let's add the tag interface to the interface TestHelper in test,
java, com.wiredbraincoffee.reward.tests.
This way, only the classes that implement this
interface are going to be executed.
These are RewardByConversionServiceTest, which has one,
two,
three, and four tests, and RewardByGiftServiceRepeatTest,
which has one test executed five times.
So five tests of this class plus four of the other class plus one test
that is defined in the interface, that's ten. However,
the test defined in the interface is executed once
for each class that implements it.
So adding 1 more test gives us 11 tests that will be executed.
Let's see.
Great.
Now, if we open the test report located in build, reports, tests, test,
you'll see that Gradle executed 11 tests.
Now let's see what happens if we add a comma, one of the
reserved characters, to Interface. Let's execute the test task
with the ‑‑info flag. The build failed.
Let's see. WARNING: Configuration error: invalid syntax. Tag will be ignored.
Now for Maven, in the pom.xml file, let's include inside the
configuration of the Surefire plugin the element groups to include
only the tests with the Interface tag.
There is no need to import the changes. Now, in the terminal,
I'm going to execute mvnw test, and Tests run: 0.
Configuration error: invalid tag syntax.
If we delete the comma in the tag and execute mvnw test
one more time, there you have it. Tests run 11.